---
layout: post
title: Star Trek is Dead
---

This should be an emotional and hyperbolic post with plenty of logical
fallacies. Please read gently.

The entire post was brought on by watching the new Star Trek: Into
Darkness film. Quickly, I want to say that this a feel good film that
you should watch. It has great special effects, some predictable plot
twists and lots of punching. If I were a studio executive, I would
rationally invest my money in J. J. Abrams to make these films. He has
developed films that are shoot 'em up without being corny, which is a
talent in itself.

That being said ... J. J. Abrams and the movie going public has
completely killed Star Trek. It is now a shell of a movie franchise,
in which characters and places are trotted out in order to let the
audience know they invested in a great entertainment franchise. It is
not even a shadow of its former self. It is more like a wizard of Oz
trick now, pay no attention to the movie behind the curtains.

After reading the introduction, you may assume I am some sort of
"trekkie". A person that has been to conventions, who knows the lines
from the original television series, believes Brent Spiner is actually
Commander Data. However, this is a mostly false assumption. I did grow
up watching the original series and the next generation. I am a fan of
science fiction books. I do have opinions about which physics faux pas
are acceptable and which are clearly mistakes.

But, the reason that I claim Star Trek is dead is not because of any
departure from the story line, faithfulness to the character
development or rigid adherence to canon. Unfortunately, it is a
combination of needless repetition of the past and the loss of the
message.

The needless repetition was on display throughout the entire
film. Everything from a replication of the famous Spock death scene
from Star Trek 2 to the famous Kahn scream. I could understand the use
of Leonard Nimoy in the first reboot, but now the franchise has proven
that it can make money. This opens up lots of really interesting plot
lines and plot devices. The appearance of the Klingons was just one
direction an entirely new movie could have gone. But, instead the
writers underestimated the audience's ability to process new bad guys
and new ideas. They instead kept leaning over to the audience and
giving us a big wink. Even the central premise of an admiral starting
a war, was played down in favor of "true" evil in Kahn. 

The loss of the Star Trek message was the final nail in the
coffin. Unfortunately, this is not my original observation. Felicia
Day posted about the lack of women in the film [here][1]. But, she is
1000% right. I mean in Star Trek: The Motion Picture, the love
interest is a bald female, which already breaks some social norms
about beauty. Since I am a boy, I will often put my foot in my mouth
regarding gender equality. But, even I was watching this movie with
skepticism, as the newest female on the cast had to disrobe randomly
for one shot. It did not seem to push one plot point forward except
maybe the possible love interest from Kirk. It did nothing to develop
the character at all. And the only intellectual development of the
character was a mention of her Ph.D. and her defusing a bomb _that
wasn't an actual bomb_. 

I am doing a fairly clumsy job of articulating my main point: Star
Trek was designed to be the ideal that society strove toward. Much
like Dr. Who is "the triumph of intellect and romance over brute force
and cynicism" (see Craig Ferguson's Dr. Who cold open [2]), Star Trek
worked toward a utopian future based on fairness and equality. Often
people will reference the first interracial kiss on the original
series as evidence of this fact. While even Star Trek was flawed in
its own execution of this ideal, the franchise (more correctly Gene
Roddenberry) strove toward the ideal of justice and equality for
everyone. More than a few episodes of both the original series and the
next generation revolved around the murky grey area in moral
questions. Some of them did not even attempt to hide these quandaries
behind action packed sub-plots.

Unfortunately, the new franchise is not even attempting to live up to
the ideals set forward by the series. It is giving us more of the
same. Females who are only as good as their attractiveness, humans only
as good as their flaws and reason always succumbing to emotion. Watch
out for the next Trek movie directed by Michael Bay.

[1]: http://feliciaday.com/blog/start-trek-musings-etc-and-spoilers-so-no-complaints
[2]: http://youtu.be/M9P4SxtphJ4

